Port MASTG-TEST-0049: Testing Emulator Detection (android) (by @Vulnit) (#3607)
OWASP/mastg: knowledge/android/MASVS-RESILIENCE/MASTG-KNOW-0031.md

Reviewer: Any file checks we could add here?

- QEMU device and sockets, /dev/socket/qemud, /dev/qemu_pipe
- QEMU trace marker, /sys/qemu_trace
- etc.

And what about https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/ActivityManager#isUserAMonkey()

Author: I added several QEMU/genymotion indicators by reading some sources that use these indicators. I did not add an exhaustive list as some of the checks I found have claimed to provide false positives depending on the manufacturer's ROM. 

Regarding `ActivityManager.isUserAMonkey()`, I think it's not an emulator-specific detection. 

From what I have read, it detects whether the current user interaction is being generated by the Android Monkey automation tool, which can also happen on physical devices and is not something that is "true" when the device is an emulator. What do you think?

| `Build.BOARD` | `unknown`, contains `nox` |
| `Build.SERIAL` | `null`, `unknown`, contains `nox` |
| `Build.ID` | `frf91` |
| `Build.RADIO` | `unknown` |
| `Build.TAGS` | `test-keys` |
| `Build.USER` | `android-build` |

Notes: normalize to lowercase and compare; vendors can change these values on rooted devices or custom ROMs. You can also edit `build.prop` on a rooted device or rebuild AOSP with custom values to bypass static string checks.

## Telephony characteristics

Check telephony only when the device reports [`FEATURE_TELEPHONY`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/pm/PackageManager#FEATURE_TELEPHONY). Emulators often return fixed identifiers through [`TelephonyManager`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/telephony/TelephonyManager).

| Method | Example emulator values |
| --- | --- |
| `getLine1Number()` | `15555215554` ... `15555215584` (even suffixes) |
| `getNetworkOperatorName()` | `android` |
| `getVoiceMailNumber()` | `15552175049` |

Permission notes:

- `getLine1Number()` requires `READ_PHONE_NUMBERS` or `READ_SMS`.
- `getVoiceMailNumber()` requires `READ_PHONE_STATE`.

> Hooking frameworks such as Frida or Xposed can hook these APIs and return false values. These are common indicators, but you may encounter different indicators and values in practice.

Reviewer: Always try to reference components using the IDs. Also, I'm intentionally removing Xposed since it's not commonly used nowadays.

```suggestion
Hooking frameworks such as @MASTG-TOOL-0001 can hook these APIs and return false values. These are common indicators, but you may encounter different indicators and values in practice.
```

## Package name indicators

Use [`PackageManager`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/pm/PackageManager) to inspect installed packages or launcher activities for known emulator prefixes:

`com.vphone.`, `com.bignox.`, `com.nox.mopen.app`, `me.haima.`, `com.bluestacks`, `cn.itools.`, `com.kop.`, `com.kaopu.`, `com.microvirt.`, `com.bignox.app`, and the exact package `com.google.android.launcher.layouts.genymotion`. Some checks also flag `Build.PRODUCT` starting with `iToolsAVM`.

> Android 11+ filters package visibility. Declare `<queries>` for specific packages or intents, or use `QUERY_ALL_PACKAGES` only when justified; see [package visibility](https://developer.android.com/training/package-visibility).

Reviewer: Reusing some content from one of my latest PRs:

````suggestion
On Android 11 and later, [package visibility restrictions](https://developer.android.com/training/package-visibility) affect this technique. If a package is installed but not visible to the app, [`getPackageInfo`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/pm/PackageManager#getPackageInfo(java.lang.String,%20int)) behaves the same as if the package were not installed, typically by throwing [`PackageManager.NameNotFoundException`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/pm/PackageManager.NameNotFoundException). This can create false negatives for package based root detection.

Developers can query specific packages on Android 11 and later by declaring them in the app manifest using the `<queries>` element:

```xml
<queries>
    <package android:name="com.bignox.app" />
</queries>
```

Otherwise they can use the `QUERY_ALL_PACKAGES` permission, which grants visibility to all installed apps but is [subject to Google Play restrictions](https://support.google.com/googleplay/android-developer/answer/10158779) and may not be justifiable for many use cases.
````

## Available activities and services

> You can query launcher activities with [`Intent.ACTION_MAIN`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/Intent#ACTION_MAIN) and [`Intent.CATEGORY_LAUNCHER`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/Intent#CATEGORY_LAUNCHER) and look for emulator package prefixes (often `com.bluestacks.`). [`ActivityManager.getRunningServices`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/ActivityManager#getRunningServices(int)) is restricted on API 26+ and usually only returns the app's own services.

Reviewer: Is this also affected by [package visibility restrictions](https://developer.android.com/training/package-visibility)?

Author: Yes it is! I have performed the corresponding acclaration on such section :)
